(energetic techno music)
All right, we have one more method to write.
And that's a peek method.
When we call the peek method
we're basically saying we want to look
at what's at the root.
Now if we wanted to remove what's at the root
we just call our delete method with an index of zero,
as we did in the last video.
And so, for a peek method all we're going to do
is return heap zero if the heap is not empty.
If the heap is empty we're gonna throw in an exception.
So this is gonna be a really simple method.
So let's get to it.
And so we're gonna say public int peek.
We don't need any parameters
because we're always gonna be peeking at the root.
We're gonna say if is empty,
then there's obviously nothing to peek at.
So we're gonna say throw new index out-of-bounds exception.
We'll just say heap is empty.
And if that's not the case,
we just want to return heap zero.
We want to return what's at the root,
and the root is always at position zero.
And that's it.
That's the peek method.
So we don't change the heap in any way.
We just return whatever's at the root.
So I'm going to comment out our deletes.
We'll print our heap, and then we'll print
what's at the root.
So, system.out.printlin(heap.peek).
And we expect to see 80 to run.
And we do, we see 80.
Now if we were to delete the root,
and actually I'll comment out the print line again
and I'll just copy this,
the maximum value in the heap becomes 75.
And as we know in a max heap,
the maximum value is always at the root.
And so we should get 75.
And we saw in the last video that our delete was working
and 75 was indeed moved to the root.
So let's run, and now we get 75.
So this is our print heap right here.
This is our peek before we do the delete,
and after the delete we have 75.
And so that's peek.
Nothing earth-shattering there.
And that's pretty much our simple implementation of a heap.
So let's talk about the time complexity
for the usual operation.
So when we insert an item, it takes all of log N time.
It's constant time to add the item,
if we go back to our insert code, this is constant time.
It's a constant time operation.
Doesn't rely on how many values you have in the heap.
But then we have to potentially fix the heap.
And to do that, in the worst case,
we may have to swap the new item
all the way up to the root.
And that would be log N swaps.
And so the time complexity for insert is O of log N.
Now for deleting, the first thing we have to do
is find the item we want to remove.
I didn't show that, but I explained that,
if we are going to allow deletion
of some random object from the heap,
we're going to have to find it first.
And that's going to be, in the worst case,
it's going to be linear.
Because we're going to use a linear search to do it.
And so that's O of N.
And then, once we've found the item we want to delete,
once again, we're going to have to fix the heap.
And once again, the worst case for that
is that we're either going to have to
take the replacement value all of the way from the root
down to the bottom of the tree, or the opposite.
We have to take the replacement value
from the bottom of the tree
and take it all of the way up to the root.
And so once again, the worst case for that will be
O of log N.
If you want to delete some random value
and you don't have the index,
the time complexity is O of N, times log N.
Because the N is from having to do the linear search
and the log N is from having to fix the heap.
However, as I've said a number of times now,
when you're working with a heap, you're really usually
only interested in the root.
You're only ever going to remove the root.
You're never going to remove anything else.
And to remove the root, you can do that in O of log N time,
because you don't have to do the linear search.
So finding the root is a constant time operation.
It's always that index zero.
And then to fix the heap will be O of log N.
So essentially, it will take you a lot longer, on average,
to remove any old random item
than it will to remove the root.
Because the root, you know exactly where it is.
Any old item, you've got to do a linear search first,
and that's going to cost you N steps, in the worst case.
So when we use heaps, we usually only want
to work with the root, because we're generally using a heap
because we're only interested in
the minimum or maximum value in the data set.
If you're interested in doing random access operations
and you're going to be doing a lot of them,
then heap is not going to be your data structure of choice.
And just to drive this home a little bit, of course,
when you're working with a heap
you can find the minimum and maximum value
in constant time, because it's always at the root.
That's different then when you're working
with a binary search tree,
because in binary search tree you may have to travel
all the way down the left or right edges
to find the minimum or maximum value.
Alright, so that's it for our implementation of a heap.
In the next video we're going to take a look
at a specific use of a heap called a priority queue.
I'll see you there.